okay so this
talk is about proto stars
we've covered a lot in the series on
stars
of uh different types with a lot of
talks about the end
stage of the life cycle of stars with
white dwarfs neutron stars black holes
quark stars and other exotic phenomena
um but i thought we'd go right back to
the beginning because there's a
stage in the existence of stars that's
often
overlooked we uh kind of skip over it
so the photograph here shows some very
young stars
and you can tell that they're young
stars because they
often very hot blue blue white colored
stars
and uh that's quite a an interesting
phase in its own right and they've been
formed
out of the collapse of these large
interstellar clouds of dirt and dust
we call them molecular clouds and they
can be some of the coldest places
in the universe we often call them
bach globules as well after a uh
dutch astronomer who uh catalogued them
so here's
ngc 281 with some dark
nebulae bach globules
because the starlight uh doesn't
penetrate inside these globules
very well the dust and so on is very
effective at
blocking the transfer of light
they uh can be about minus 250 degrees
centigrade right in the center of the
cloud the heat
from the starlight just doesn't make it
into the center
um and that's good because if it was
warm then the material would find it
very difficult
to collapse under gravity heat is the
enemy
of gravitational collapse and so it's
these cold clouds
that form into
the collapsing regions that create new
stars
there's another dark nebula here this is
barnard
68 i love this one it's so
dark you can't see any stars and it's
against
a myriad of stars in the milky way so
the rest of the field of view
is full of background stars
and round the edge of the nebula you can
make out what's going on
in the thinner regions towards the edge
of the cloud
one or two of those background stars are
poking through
but right in the middle there it's so
thick
that uh even though this material is
really quite dense it's got the density
of thin
smoke if uh even in the most
dense regions really but there are many
light years of it that you're trying to
look through and it's enough that the
visible light can't penetrate
now sometimes we use other wavelengths
and
particularly infrared light is very good
for studying what's going on
inside these clouds because it can
penetrate
through is not as easily scattered
by the dust particles these little tiny
particles of
my smoke-like material
here's a photograph of another star
forming region
absolutely awesome this is uh taken by
the hubble space telescope
and of course the hubble space telescope
can pick up
quite a lot of that infrared light which
makes
taking these photographs of these
relatively cold objects
uh really quite straightforward they
don't give out much light
in the visible or high energy parts of
the spectrum you really need to go to
long wavelengths
down into the red and beyond into the
infrared to really see them
this is the carina nebula or part of the
carina nebula
and it's seven and a half thousand light
years away in the next
spiral arm we live in the uh a little
suburb
of just off the orion spur which is a
kind of half-formed spiral arm
so the majority of uh things like the
orion nebula which we'll see
in this talk are in that main orion spur
that's about 1500 light years from us
we're out in the suburbs and then
there's a gap
and uh the perseus spiral arm is at
seven and a half thousand light years
and so a lot of the nebulae that we we
study are
around about either fifteen hundred or
seven and a half thousand light years
from us
and you've got one or two bright stars
in the photograph and you can see
how the gas around the edges of the
denser dark brown regions looks to be
boiling away and it really is that's the
heat energy of
these bright stars making the outer
regions of these
cold nebulae boil off into space
and the stellar winds and their
ultraviolet radiation coming from these
hot young stars erodes away at these uh
uh amazing structures causing these sort
of pillars
where you see one part is protecting the
bits that are behind they're in it's a
in the shadow
of the direction from which the
starlight and stellar winds are coming
from
now here we have yet more wonderful uh
structures with a lot of these um
bok globules again the really dense
regions
and this is uh
just characteristic of the regions in
which these new stars
form lots and lots of these photographs
here's another one
factories globules taken again by hubble
you can really see
how dark and black and dense these uh
regions appear
now once the star forming process sets
off
then what we see are little tiny
blobs which get the name
herbig harrow objects because they've
moved on from the bach globule stage
to a stage where a new star is beginning
to form
inside the denser parts
of what was a very cold bok globule
and it's beginning to create a process
of gravitational collapse and accretion
of the material into a spiraling disk
in the center uh into a large dense blob
that will become
the star once the star forming process
has uh completed and so these hh objects
as they're known are the
denser regions of these nebulae when
they begin to
collapse and there's quite a number of
them marked out on this
lovely picture here which we'll take a
little bit more of a look at
you can zoom in on some of them and you
can see the light coming from the center
of these
where the proto-stars are beginning to
shine in the middle of these
collapsing regions
now the study of these really kicked off
with a discovery in the constellation of
taurus
and in particular taurus contains this
very lovely nebula the taurus nebula
it's about 450 light years away from us
so fairly close by and
there are some clumps embedded to the
top
left of the image is the lens 1544
pre-stellar core a proto star
that's going to turn into a star
at some point in the
fairly near future in astronomical terms
and in fact this was studied by william
herschel
and he detected water vapor by its
spectrum
in the taurus nebula um in and around
the uh caught this uh collapsing
pre-stellar core
and it's probably around two thousand
times the amount of water
in the the collapsing nebula
that there is in the whole of the
earth's oceans so
tremendous amount of h2o in these
regions
now also in the taurus nebula is the
archetypal star after which a whole
class
of uh proto stars are named
it's t tauri um the
stars are named in order of their
brightness by
greek letters and then when they run out
of greek letters they resort to
ordinary um letters from the normal
alphabet
and so this is uh something like the
40th brightest
star in taurus
and it's a variable star which is what
attracted people's attention to it
and so there's a class of these variable
stars called t
tauri variables
usually around uh 9th to 14th magnitude
for this particular one
so not a particularly bright star
especially when it's during
at the fainter end of its variability
but that's quite a big range five
magnitudes
each magnitude is a factor of two and a
half remember
so five magnitudes a factor of a hundred
difference
in brightness
and studies of t tauri have revealed
that it's just 10 million years old so
very very
young for a star there are actually
three
stars present spectroscopically we can
determine
that there are two other components
there inside
this region called burnham's nebula as
part of the taurus nebula complex
also marked on the map with the green
blob is the location
of a bit of an astronomical mystery
struve's
lost nebula it was catalogued as part of
the ngc
catalogue that john herschel carolyn
herschel worked on
and it's not there anymore it's vanished
the the observational item has
disappeared
so this may be part of the dynamics
of the comings and goings and the
collapse of
various regions within the whole of this
nebula complex so there may have been
something there that was uh
shining brightly and now it's been
obscured
by other material or something we just
don't know what's happened
to struve's lost nebula
there's another example of a t-tory star
this one's
uh v v1331 in the constellation of
cygnus
about 1800 light years away and you can
see the star
bursting out of its cocoon bursting out
of the
pre-stellar nebula can see the remains
material and now that the star is is
shining brightly
it is blowing away the remains of the uh
nebula from which it was born and this
is
one of the interesting factors about
star formation that it's a
a self-limiting process once the star
lights up the heat and
energy coming away from the star
prevents
that collapse you remember i said that
the clouds need to be cold
in order for the gravity to be able to
pull them together
if they're hot then the molecules are
whizzing around
and have essentially escape velocity
from the gravity well
and so once you heat up the center the
material there just boils away
and so the star forming process switches
off
and this is why there's a maximum upper
limit
to the size of stars at around 100 solar
masses
because you just can't get enough
material to fall in
under gravity uh quickly enough before
the star gets
so hot that it blows the rest of the
material away
now i've said that these young stars are
often very hot indeed
and because they're so hot they're often
blue white in color
this is another t tauri star lighting up
uh
the region of nebula that uh it was born
in
and the blue light from the star is
bouncing back to us
reflecting off the gas
so uh just reveals how hot they are
now you'll probably remember that when
we look at
stars we often classify them on the
hertzsprung russell diagram
so we have the brightness on the y-axis
the
absolute luminosity so the faintest
stars are down at the bottom of the
chart and the most powerful stars right
up at the top
and that correlates with their mass
fairly well
but the x-axis along the bottom there
is their color which correlates exactly
with their temperature
and we have the cool stars on the right
and the hot stars
the blue stars on the left and so
most stars are on this diagonal line
that runs from the red dwarfs at the
bottom right
up through the orange dwarfs more
massive as mass increases you get to
yellow dwarfs like the sun there
and then the white stars and the blue
white stars
and finally up to the blue supergiants
right
up at the top there
and if they're on that main sequence
that main diagonal band
then it's because they are in the
process of converting
light elements to heavy elements by
nuclear fusion
usually hydrogen to helium um certainly
only hydrogen to helium for the small
stars but the larger stars can start to
get hot enough and dense enough in the
center of their
compressed cores to allow further fusion
processes to happen
but once they reach a certain point
and run out of ordinary hydrogen to burn
that's when they
migrate upwards and leftward
sorry rightwards into the giant and
supergiant stages there
and then they usually have a hydrogen
burning
shell over the outside of the core
burning other materials in those regions
now the t tory stars are not marked on
this chart
but i'll show you on a slightly less
colorful version here
where they exist now it's a little bit
complicated
but their pre main sequence these two
tori stars so they don't have the core
temperature yet
to trigger that hydrogen fusion process
that needs uh temperature of 10 million
degrees
they're still in the process of
shrinking and contracting and the energy
is being released from gravity
rather than from fusion and that makes
them very very different indeed
instead of shining as a result of energy
liberated from
nuclear fusion they are shining
brightly very brightly indeed
but from the energy from gravitational
collapse
that potential energy released as things
fall down a gravity well is enough to
make them
glow very very bright and hot indeed
and um indeed lord kelvin was
trying to figure out what powered stars
back in the
late 1800s and didn't know anything
about radioactivity or nuclear energy
and he couldn't understand what made
stars burn for so long
he figured out that uh if they were
burning under normal chemistry
so the equivalent of burning coal in air
then a star like the sun would burn
through its entire mass of fuel in only
5 000 years
he then went on to look at what would
happen from gravity
gravitational collapse down from a a
a disc the size of the solar system and
worked out that would be enough to
perhaps power the sun for 20 million
years
and that's about right that is about the
age limit that you get for these
t-tory stars so on the diagram we have
the line representing the main sequence
i'll bring the mouse over
so here this is the main sequence
and the t tauri stars actually start
up here and depending on their mass they
fall onto the main sequence so the very
small
ones that are going to become red dwarfs
start up here and drop
down to to a 1 10th solar mass red dwarf
two tenths four tenths and then for
complicated reasons to do with uh
what goes on in the middle of them they
uh
get a kink in their journey so they'll
fall down to this line here
and then to the left and suddenly
get
hotter because if you go left on this
diagram you're getting hotter for the
same brightness
the color is changing and the further up
the graph you get the more pronounced
these wiggles and kinks get
through to them arriving at different
places
and you can see the the timeline here so
um slightly larger ones collapse really
quite quickly
in only uh 10 thousand or a hundred
thousand years
the smaller ones might take uh
a hundred million years to collapse from
the earliest
stage that we might call a protostar
down to reach the main sequence that's
because
gravity being much less is
just going to take longer to bring
everything together
so what's going on why why at .6
solar masses and upwards do we get these
weird kinks
well that turns out to be
from a process called lithium burning
i mentioned already that the normal
process of nuclear fusion
of hydrogen requires a core temperature
of 10 million
kelvin 10 10 million degrees
and that's usually only reached if you
have
a stellar core of 75 times the mass of
jupiter so jupiter
gas giant planet nowhere near enough
material to trigger off
any nuclear fusion but at 75 times that
mass
then you will achieve a proper star
a hydrogen fusing star and that's the
smallest possible red dwarf it
corresponds to
0.7 of the mass of the sun
and
there's a interesting intermediate stage
that causes that kink at 60
times the mass of jupiter if you reach
that
mass with your your nascent stellar core
then the temperature doesn't make it to
10 million degrees but it does
reach two and a half million and at two
and a half mega kelvin
that is enough for the diagram
shown on the right to kick into effect
and this is where what we start with
is the normal protons the hydrogen
nuclei the single
positively charged particles and they
are able to
combine with and fuse with um
isotopes of lithium particularly
lithium-6 here
uh if you take a proton and you stick it
to lithium-6
you get a seven particle nucleus
with four protons and that makes it
beryllium so beryllium seven
beryllium-7 though can then capture an
electron
spit out a neutrino and the process
turns a proton into a neutron so you
still end up with a
a mass seven nucleus but you swap
from having uh four protons and three
neutrons
to having three protons and four
which makes it lithium seven
and so we've turned our lithium-6 into
lithium-7
via beryllium what you can then do
is have the lithium-7 capture another
proton in another fusion event
and that creates beryllium 8 now
beryllium 8's
highly unstable
and falls apart in a fission event to
create
two helium-4 nuclei and so
what we've done is taken two protons and
uh a lithium nucleus and turned it into
some helium and released some energy
along the way
and as a result of this this burns
through all the lithium
content of these small stars leaving
almost
none left it's the first nuclear process
that really
gets going inside these stars
in fact that's not entirely true because
you can get some uh
of the two particle hydrogen the heavy
hydrogen called deuterium
that can also undergo some reactions as
well and that only needs about 1 million
degrees
and these are the some of the processes
that actually power
the warming of brown dwarf stars that
are
in the range less than 75
jupiter masses um that are going to fail
to become
full-blown stars but it also happens in
these proto-stars
during the first phase of their life and
it's why you have
uh that kink on the diagram it suddenly
causes a release of
energy once the temperature hits these
millions of degrees
so let's have another look at some
really lovely photographs
of this star forming regions this is the
trifid nebula
visible at this time of year just low in
the south
and uh this is a fantastic infrared
picture from
the spitzer space telescope
but we're going to zoom in on that uh
region that's marked
with the uh jigsaw piece there and have
a look
at some of the detail and what we can
see here
is some of these hh objects these uh
herbig harrow regions where new stars
are being formed
there's some new stars buried in the
nebula
here and some deeply buried ones just
poking out of it
and these globules on the end here
characteristic of this type of nebula
but really look up here up top left
we've got a little column here that's
resisting being boiled away by the
bright light of a star that's out of
shot
top left but this this is different
this is a jet emerging
it's a jet of material shooting out
from the bright center just in here
and this is uh where a proto star
has formed and has got an accretion disk
uh whirling around it of more material
that's
trying to fall in but is competing with
the
thermal processes versus gravity to
decide whether it shoots in or not
and that whirling mass
ends up creating one of these uh jets
in fact they're probably one in each
direction we can only see one of them
so here's some examples of some more
jets
the green gas up in the top left picture
is the accretion disk around the belt of
it
is the thickest part where there's lots
of dust and right in the center
where the arrow is pointing that's where
the protostar
is trying to form but along its spin
axis
a very highly collimated beam of
hot material is being hurled back out
along both the north and south spin axis
of this rapidly rotating protostar
you can see the same thing happening in
the other diagrams in hh
34 we've just got the protostar and
the jet emerging and you can see how
it's a an irregular
bursty process lumps of material get
thrown out along
the uh line of the jet
and in the bottom photograph of hh-47
the star is right in the middle just
here
not particularly bright but it's been
pushing out these
jets both ways with a slightly
sinusoidal wobble to them because the
spin axis and the magnetic axis of the
star are not very well aligned
and so it hurls the material out along
the corkscrew path
and then it gradually loses energy until
uh it's uh competing with pushing
its way through all of the interstellar
dust and material at the two ends
and gradually slows down and spreads out
and forms these enormous
lobes there's usually quite a lot of
radioactivity
um radio waves coming from that region
so here we can see that uh jet again
emerging from the uh
doughnut like region
lovely edge on view but if the animation
will work
here's an animated view of the uh jet
emerging
so you can see the irregular nature of
the
bursts of material coming out along the
jet
and then running out of
momentum as they hit the diffuse
interstellar gas roughly in the middle
of the screen there
caught and the bursts arrive and cause
that
to light up dumping their residual
energy into it
it's a very complicated process to
describe
but the conservation of angular momentum
is involved in causing the
uh whole lot to spin up as the
star and the protostar and the accretion
disk forming around it
contract inwards very much like an ice
skater
pulling their arms in the conservation
of angular momentum increases the spin
rate
and then because this is getting heated
and turning into a
plasma you get electrical currents
flowing
and where you have spinning electrical
currents you get a magnetic field
at right angles and that causes these
jets to form where the charged material
gets
spirals around the magnetic field that's
being twisted
into these corkscrew patterns sticking
out of the stars
and the mathematics of of this is called
the crank
model uh which refers to the crank
of uh winding the handle of a dynamo
um quite complicated mathematics but
we're reasonably confident that uh
that's the mechanism that drives these
jets
you can see just in this photograph how
very highly collimated the beams can be
there's the proto star in the center
here
hiding behind this big cloud and a jet
coming out this way until it dumps its
momentum and loses
the speed and fans out into this
shock where it meets the denser part of
the nebula
but it's very very tightly collimated to
a nice tight beam coming out here
and presumably the same is going on in
the opposite direction
and again it's dumping the momentum into
this shock wave at the back here
but a lovely photograph and so
roughly aligned with that this is the
sort of
diagrammatic representation of these hh
objects and their polar
jets you have the protostar in the
middle
materials being heated by falling
in under gravity turning its potential
energy
into kinetic energy and then
friction of uh material whirling around
heats both the star and the accretion
disk up
uh material is then shot out along the
uh the
twisted uh corkscrew magnetic fields
these helical magnetic fields that get
created
here's another example on the left of a
proto star
formed and they're very tightly
collimated discs
up not discs jets coming out away from
the center
and again on the right yet another
example
and they've colored this one red and
blue
because we can measure the doppler
effect and work out
the angle of whether the material is
coming
towards us or away from us so the blue
material is on the side
that's pointing slightly our way and the
red material there is coloured
red because it's got a doppler shift
indicating it's moving away from us
and it's one of the things that a lot of
people study in universities is how
these jets
form and how the magnetic fields
around the disc get uh twisted and spun
up into these very very tightly
collimated beams
it's lots of complicated uh fluid
dynamics and magneto hydrodynamics
that goes into supercomputers to
simulate this to prove that uh
our theories and mathematics generate
the same sort of answers that the uh
we see in nature
so here's a couple of lovely examples of
where
we've got the uh towers of
remaining nebula that are still dense
enough
to appear brown here and at the tip
of each of them is an hh object of
puerto star spinning like crazy and
putting out these
jets um and the jets are then creating
these lovely bow shocks
can zoom in a little bit more on that
so the protostar is hiding just here
this is part of the remaining nebula and
this will be in the shadow of the
accretion disk
where it's not being blown away by the
light and the
stellar winds coming from the star
and so the material is able to survive
in this location here and here we have
the jets
with these blob-like emergencies and
again the shock wave both sides where
the jets are brought to rest
as the material hits the rest of the
nebula
here's another one with a little tiny
bit of animation to it hope you can see
that
okay so you can see the material moving
out from the protostar
i really do make some of the most uh
beautiful objects
in all of astrophotography but sometimes
you can't see them at all
here's an example of an invisible jet
where we can see the two lobes of the
shock wave where the material is being
dumped
but the center part is obscured by
dark dust that's blocking our view of
what's going on right in the center
we saw this one already hh 47
um with the slightly more irregular
discs that shows that
helical structure caused by the
misalignment
as this star is processing and the
magnetic alignment
of the magnetic field is not exactly in
line with the spin axis
but just to give you some idea the these
things are huge
at 20 times the size of our solar system
so
the proto-star is influencing really
quite a
a wide region that little tiny bar on
the bottom of the photograph there
represents a thousand astronomical units
an astronomical unit the distance from
the earth to the sun
150 million kilometers and
out to neptune it's 30 astronomical
units
well that bar is a thousand au
and so these these structures these jets
are flinging material
out to tremendous distances
here's hh-47 again lying on its
side and i've shown it this way around
because we have another photograph
coming up that's been taken
not in visible light like this one where
we've got the
the blues coming from oxygen and the
pinky color coming from the classic
hydrogen alpha
six five six point two eight nanometer
radiation that's uh
visible to our eyes but here the spitzer
space telescope has had a look at it in
infrared
in the same alignment and now we can see
through more of that uh
structure in the center there right into
the sort of
butterfly shape emergent right next to
the
proto star in the middle and you can
even see
quite a lot of the cold dark dusty
material that
is a much larger cloud than the visible
object
seems to suggest but based on that
photograph
and uh taking the spectrum of the
material we can
figure out what uh molecules we can find
in there looking in the infrared is a
very good way of
being able to determine which molecules
are which because the molecules bend and
stretch at different
uh frequencies and those frequencies
correspond
to the energies of infrared light
and so we can see the classic dip here
from water
at six microns methyl alcohol slightly
different so methanol
a little dip from the hydrogens of the
methane of ch4
and then a big dip from silicates which
is telling us that there's a lot of
uh rock basically a lot of
rocky material silicon dioxide
silicon silicates with metals associated
with them are a large component of all
forms of
rock then we've got some water ice
turning up
and this lovely peak here from carbon
dioxide co2
in its frozen form
so you can really see a lot of the
interesting molecules that are present
um in these molecular clouds
and of course it's very important that
they have those because
planets are going to form out of the
clouds as well as the proto-stars
here's another image of
hh-47 that's been taken just in detail
with a different wavelength
and you can see these circular
smoke rings that have been blown off
down the jet
absolutely lovely image i think
and so around these protostars we also
find the remains of the accretion disk
the leftover builders rubble from
building the star in the first place
and we often refer to these as
proto-planet
disks so we have a proto-star right in
the center
shining by the power of gravity remember
at this stage
not yet lit up by nuclear fusion
but still pouring out lots of uh energy
and these protoplanetary disks
surrounding them are the material that's
going to go on and coalesce in its own
right
to form planets and we can see that in
action here we've got a simulation on
the left
and a real photograph on the right
almost showing these spiral arms forming
inside the uh
protoplanetary so this is quite
interesting because
when we see star formation going on in
these disks we see
the dense object in the center we see
these jets being thrown out along the
axis
and we see a spiral arm structure and
you can relate that in your mind to the
formation of galaxies
where the central object is so massive
it's
in fact a supermassive black hole but
that can often have these
accretion disks with astrophysical jets
throwing material clean out of the
galaxy and of course the galaxy
often has spiral arms during this stage
as well
so it's very much the same processes but
in miniature
going on around these proto stars
there's a lovely photograph of a
protoplanetary disc the protostar in the
middle
lighting it up with the the heat coming
off the
collapse process and
say it almost looks like a tiny spiral
galaxy
now a lot of these we've had to map
using very long wavelength
light indeed and it's the alma
atacama um millimeter telescope
so it's it's using wavelengths of a
millimeter which are in the uh
microwave and radiate radio waves really
but they're
very short wavelength radio waves
longer than infrared but shorter than
normal
microwaves your microwave oven has
wavelengths of 12 centimeters this is a
looking at wavelengths of a millimeter
or so
and we've got quite a catalogue of
interesting uh solar systems
in the process of formation here where
the protostar is in the center
and you're getting rings of material
forming and of course those rings are
going to
result in the creation of planets at
that
orbital distance from the star so
definitely seeing that solar system like
structure
starting to emerge
now here we've got a nice wide field
view
of the serpens nebula it's in the orion
uh sort of distance of 1300 light years
category so we get a great view of it
because fairly nearby
but in the upper right of the image
there is a proto star
with an accretion disk and it's uh
creating what they call the bat signal
um because the star is creating
a shadow across the nebula which is the
shadow of the protoplanetary disk
now it takes a little bit of getting
your head around it but is this star
here that we're talking about
and can you see how there is a dark
wedge
both sides where the nebula is not
being lit so this is the shadow
of the protoplanetary disk being
projected outwards
and there's a second little one example
over here where there's
bits missing apparently in the nebula so
i'll just draw that in
for you so the the accretion disk the
protoplanetary disk is casting these
shadows uh out if we just go
back you can see actually it's creating
almost a circular
shadow on the nebula up here
very much like gotham city with batman
and the bat signal
hence the name i'll just bring those
back again so you can see where i'm
talking about
and then actually if we go and look deep
inside the heart of the
orion nebula we find we can
zoom in on some of these structures
forming so
here we have a proto star
right in the center of a fairly dark
dusty disk out of which it's forming and
some other
blobs the globules that are going on to
form new stars and new planetary systems
and another one here where the collapse
in the center is getting dense enough to
create a new star
but one of the processes that's very
important
in these proto stars these t tauri stars
is that in this early phase
of their creation i said that they
get very hot and they create tremendous
solar winds blowing outwards
and these stellar winds not only
prevent the star growing anymore but
they have a huge influence
on the nature and distribution
of the leftover material that goes into
forming the family of planets that
most likely evolve around the stars
what it does is it blows away an awful
lot of the
volatile material the methane water
ammonia those sorts of easily boiled
materials
um from the inner regions
and carries them out to the colder
regions further out in the uh
proto-solar system and beyond what's
called the snow line or the ice line
where it gets cold enough further away
from the star
to form uh back into solids
and there's a very interesting example
of that
in the orion nebula this is a marvelous
photograph of the orion nebula
and v883 orionis
is a t tauri star um
just next to the the main part of the
orion nebula there
um and i think it might be this one here
there
the uh this this is another t tauri star
associated with um a herbig harrow
object
uh with jets and all of the rest of it
forming
and we can definitely see the disc
having been blown away sufficiently well
to see the process of uh
sorting of the material and the removal
from the inner part of this new solar
system
of the volatile materials blowing them
out beyond the uh
sight line so in fact here's is m42 and
we're just down here just a bit below it
so it's in this direction
i got a not a photograph but an artist's
impression of what we've detected at
around v8 eight eight 33 three
and that is this idea that you have the
star in the center and then the
rocky silicate material that's been
detected
spectroscopically um and the metals
are staying in the central region
and all of the volatile material the
so-called ices like ammonia and water
and
carbon dioxide carbon monoxide
methane all those small molecules that
have a low
low boiling point have been blasted away
from that
inner solar system out into the
outer regions beyond the snow line and
of course that's very much the picture
that we have in our solar system
with the inner planets mostly being
composed of the
highly refractory dense materials the
rock and the metals whereas the gas
giants contain
vast amounts of volatile
substances and forming much larger
sizes of planets further out beyond the
snow line
and just to say that of course one of
the
factors that triggers this whole life
cycle
is that giant stars
explode as supernovae scatter their
contents
all over the cosmos and it is then
from these that eventually the uh cold
dark nebulae form and condense
and recycle themselves back to form
these proto-stars
these hot regions that are not burning
by nuclear fusion yet but are
nevertheless
critical in determining exactly what
the planetary environment around the
young star will be
when the star eventually finally lights
up
by nuclear fusion and
that blasts away all the remaining gas
and leaves you with whatever planets
have already formed
so most of that planet forming process
goes
on during the t tory stage
and that's why they're so important
really to understanding uh what's going
on
so thank you very much for listening